# METR-4990

Special research project with Dr. Stacey Hitchcock that investigated lake crossing MCSs to determine if the marine stable layer influences the persistence or dissipiation of the MCS. We analyzed the downstream synoptic/mesoscale environment (in conjuction with previous literature, see Metz 2011) and the interaction between the cold pool and marine stable layer. For the 7/19/2019 derecho we determined that the synoptic/mesoscale environment was quite similar to Johns (1993) warm-season progressive derecho and the environment over the lake was favorable for a possible MCS survival (according to the persistence/dissipation checklist provided by Justin Arnott). Following the collision between the cold pool and marine stable layer, the cold pool strengthened as evidenced by higher magnitude potential and equivalent potential temperature perturbations, and increased in depth from 1000-1500 meters to 2000-3000 meters. Low LFCs along and ahead of the cold pool suggest that the cold pool was deep enough to sufficiently lift parcels to their LFC. High instability with MUCAPE >3000 J/kg favored deep, moist convection. The combination of these features allowed for the continued initiation of convection along and ahead of the cold pool. Furthermore, the MCS persisted over the lake despite the presence of the marine stable layer. While this research project provided value insight, more research needs to be done on this topic to increase our understanding in the persistence and dissipation of lake crossing MCS, specifically with the interaction between the cold pool and marine stable layer. 
